# Multiple Endpoints in Clinical Trials:

- The issues of multiplicity and methods that apply to multiple endpoints also generally
apply to other sources of multiplicity, including other estimand attributes (e.g., multiple doses, 
time points, or study population subgroups)

- multiple different drugs for a single disease in a master protocol (not scope of the guidelines)

- When there is more than one primary or secondary endpoint, it is important to ensure that the 
evaluation of multiple hypotheses will not lead to inflation of the study’s overall Type I error [...]

- For example, for three independent endpoints, the Type I error rate is 1 - (0.975 * 0.975 * 0.975), which is about 7%. For ten 
independent endpoints, the Type I error rate is about 22%. If the multiple endpoints are 
correlated, the overall Type I error rate is also inflated but potentially by a lesser degree.

- Even when a single outcome variable is being assessed, if multiple facets of that outcome are 
analyzed (e.g., multiple dose groups, multiple time points, or multiple subject subgroups based 
on demographic or other characteristics) and if any one of the analyses is used to conclude that 
the drug has been shown to produce a beneficial effect, the multiplicity of analyses may cause 
inflation of the Type I error rate

- *Multiple primary endpoints* occur in three ways, further described in section III.C. The first is 
when there are multiple primary endpoints, and each endpoint could be sufficient on its own to 
establish the drug’s efficacy. These multiple endpoints thus correspond to multiple chances of 
success, and in this case, failure to adjust for multiplicity can lead to Type I error rate inflation 
and a false conclusion that the drug is effective. [the others are not problematic in terms of multiplicity issue]

- The overall Type I error rate should control for the primary and secondary endpoint families all together.


- Many diseases have multiple sequelae, and an effect demonstrated on any one of these aspects 
could support a conclusion of effectiveness. Selection of a single primary endpoint may be 
difficult, however, if the aspect of a disease that will be responsive to the drug or the evaluation method that will better detect a treatment effect is not known a priori (at the time of trial design).
In this circumstance, a study might be designed such that success on any one of several
endpoints could support a conclusion of effectiveness. This creates a primary endpoint family.
For example, consider a drug for the treatment of burn wounds where it is not known whether the 
drug will increase the rate of wound closure or reduce scarring, but the demonstration of either 
effect alone would be considered clinically important. A study in this case might have both 
wound closure rate and a scarring measure as separate primary endpoints.

